[MUSIC]
>> Jon: That was the editing phase and
now we're moving into
the debugging phase over here
which will be pretty fun.
So step through debugging, which is a
concept that is really popular in a lot of
programming languages, but for a long time
was missing as an option from JavaScript,
so I think it's new for a lot of people.
The basic idea is one of the probably
the most common way I see people debug
JavaScript applications right now is
console log all over the place, right?
It's probably what a lot of you do and
something like going in each function
console log, it worked, console log,
it didn't work and then refresh and
see what's in the console.
So step through debugging allows you to
have a lot more control than that and
just be more precise in general.
So let's kind of do one together,
kind of talking it through, and
then we'll have one more as a challenge
where you can do on your own.
So I'm gonna go to this Debugging tab.
This will be the challenge,
what's wrong with this Github thing.
But in the meantime, I put another little
file so I'm gonna open up the dev tools,
I'm gonna go to Sources,
make this a little bit bigger.
>> Jon: I'm gonna go ahead and
remove this mapping for now, the
workspace, cuz I don't need it any longer.
And basically another cool little tip
that you can do here, let me close these,
is you can Cmd+P and you can do
a fuzzy search just like Sublime or
Atom or anything like that.
So you can start looking for
files this way.
You can do .js to see the .js files,
.css, anything like that.
So I made this one which you wouldn't be
able to find maybe naturally cuz it's just
set aside but hopefully the GitHub
one will be a little bit easier.
So this is debugging2.js
that we'll do together.
So I'm gonna not serve in
the file system this time.
So basically I've got this code and
it's a little bit confusing.
It's functions that call
each other whatever.
And I wanted to show step through
debugging so we can really get a feel for
how this can help you better understand
the code that you're working with.
So, before we kind of squeeze this right
panel off to the side and ignored it.
Now we're gonna do the same
thing with the left panel.
So we don't need this kind of file system
thing anymore, now we want these two.
So the first thing that I'll
do is I'm gonna go ahead and
the way you add what's called a break
point is by clicking on a line number.
So, I'm gonna click on line number 2 and
you get this blue breakpoint here.
So, I'm not sure where everybody's at,
as far as this goes.
So, I'm kinda gonna start with
an explanation from the beginning and
move through it.
So, basically the idea with step through
debugging and a breakpoint and why those
are named that way is a breakpoint is
communicating with the browser and
it's saying when you
go to parse this code.
I want you to halt all execution and
I want you to maintain state of everything
that you had going on at that point.
And I want you to give me control.
So we're actually really just
pausing the JavaScript execution.
And the reason it's called step through
debugging is because from that pause,
you're then able to either step into
the function that's being called,
step over it to the next one,
or step out of it back.
So you get these kind of three moves here.
So let's take a look at them.
So I set a breakpoint by
clicking on a line number and
then I'm gonna go ahead and
just refresh the page.
So it's gonna load all the HTML and
CSS just like normal, and
it's gonna load the JavaScript
file just like normal.
But now when it goes to parse it and
run it.
I should say not parse it.
So you're not gonna hit a breakpoint
just because the code exists.
You're only gonna hit a breakpoint if
that code actually goes to be executed.
So if I didn't have this foo here
where I'm calling a function,
the breakpoint is not gonna show.
Or it's not gonna pause.
But since I call foo and
it goes to execute this line,
it pauses it here for me.
So we get this little paused in debugger.
Ignoring this tab over here, we've got
a couple of things going on over here and
this is where things start
to get pretty technical.
So stop me if I gloss over something or if
I need to slow down or anything like that.
So I'm gonna pretend this isn't here for
now.
So we've got [LAUGH] watch,
Call Stack, and Breakpoints.
So the breakpoint is just letting us
know because often in more advanced
applications, you'll have breakpoints all
over your application, more than just one.
So this down here, this section,
we can kind of ignore because
this is only gonna tell you
where all your break points are.
So let's kind of cut this whole
section out, forget about it.
Watch allows you to spy on any variable,
anything declared.
So for example,
if we wanted to see what one is set
to before this line gets executed.
We can go ahead and
add something to Watch and type in one and
hit Enter and
you'll see that it's undefined.
However after this line is executed,
if we keep one being watched,
you'll see that it's
set to the string one.
So this is really cool.
So you can even do things like
you can double-click to edit,
you could set it to foo, and it'll tell
you that foo is a function, right?
And then you can even dive down
into it like this and see,
does it have any arguments?
No, what's its prototype?
Things like that.
So
you get this full control where you can
really get a good understanding of what's
going on here.
And then the call stack is just
simply how did we get here?
Why did we execute this bit of code?
So for this case,
this is contrived, an example.
It's really, really simple, right?
We called foo because foo was called
by anonymous function here, right?
We called foo so we got to foo.
In a bigger code base, you're often
going to see things like well,
you had an event listener
which went through jQuery.
jQuery did the on-click and
then jQuery called its trigger method and
then jQuery trigger called this,
you know what I mean.
So you'll start seeing these
call stacks that are longer and
longer the more advanced your program is.
For this example, it's really simple.
So it's not uncommon to see
30 files in the call stack or
something like that in a real application.
So this is stuff that we're watching,
this is all totally up to you to add and
remove.
And then this is like at whatever break
point we're at, how did we get here?
Those are kind of the two
things going on and
then very simply this will just
pause wherever you tell it to.
So you can do things like you can click
back and forth in this call stack.
If there were multiple files, it'll
jump through those multiple files but
since there's only one, it'll just jump
from line 2 up here to line 27 down here.
And so, okay, so now we're kinda here,
we see that we have this function foo.
We already checked one and it's undefined.
So now we've got some choices and
the choices are up here.
So we can resume script execution, this
for right now will just display the rest
of the page because we don't
have any other break points.
But if we did have other break points,
this is like, I didn't want this one,
skip through for now.
So this could be useful if you were
checking when a function errors and you
put a breakpoint in the function and the
first time it hits, it's not the error.
So you're like, just play on,
just keep going.
The second time it hits, it'll stop again.
But since we only have this called once,
hitting resume script execution
will just resume the script as is.
You can step over to
the next function call.
So okay, we stopped at one, that's great.
Stop when anything else happens.
Stop the next time a function's called and
we'll do that in a second.
You can step into a function call, so
if the next place we stop was bar.
And we didn't wanna skip all
the way down to this call.
We could actually start stepping inward.
So if you think about like when
you're writing JavaScript code,
you kind of start building these
pyramid sometimes of functions, right?
So you've got your Ajax function and
then inside that is a success function and
then inside that, you're sorting names or
something like that, right?
So step into is just going
one next function in.
Basically kind of like looking for
curly braces almost, and stepping in.
Stepping over would be like if
you have foo and you have bar.
You're not gonna go into foo,
you're just gonna step over to bar and
stop at the next one.
And then when you step in,
you often need to just step back out.
So that's really the only
three ways that you can go.
You can step over it, you can step
into it, and if you've stepped in,
then you get the option
to step back out of it.
So let's play with that,
cuz that's kind of an advanced concept.
Yeah, go ahead.
>> Speaker 2: Can you touch on that
async check box up there?
>> Jon: Yeah, definitely.
So basically, and this is really cool,
a powerful feature.
Basically the stack traces
are typically reserved for
these synchronous methods like what foo
calls bar calls bad, something like that.
Chrome dev tools is adding a lot of really
cool support around async, promises,
await, things like that.
And so
basically an async stack trace is like,
if you had a file, script.js,
and it did some Ajax thing and
then came back with a success function and
called something else.
So it's basically just the full
asynchronous stack trace.
So if you're working with Ajax or
something like that,
you could have that ticked.
If you just want to see what
immediately called the function,
then you don't have that ticked.
Okay, cool, so the point being with these
things is that I really want people to get
comfortable clicking through them.
Because I think a lot of people just don't
use it cuz you get to a page like this,
and it's just really intimidating looking.
There's a lot going on.
So you can't really mess anything up here.
And worst case scenario,
you just hit Cmd+R or
Ctrl whatever Windows people use,
and you just refresh the page and
you'll get right back to this stack trace,
this breakpoint.
So you can really just play.
So if I hit resume script execution,
like I said, it's just done.
There's no other breakpoints.
So I'll hit Refresh again.
And on this new Refresh, again,
it pauses in debugger at line 2.
So this time I'm not gonna hit Play.
This time I'll hit step over
to the next function call.
So I hit step over and it goes for
a little bit and it goes.
So now this is important to notice and
kind of cool.
Some people might have thought
that it would stop here, but
this is just this function declaration,
right?
It's not actually executing any code.
So this is actually gonna get hoisted,
right, JavaScript hoisted to the top.
So the next thing that actually executes
is calling this function bar here.
So let's say we want to step over
again and see what happens next.
It goes to foobar.
So from bar, if we had stepped in,
that would have meant going inside bar.
But to step over, it means go to
the next thing that gets called foobar.
Does that make sense as I know it's
like this took me forever to get my
head around.
I kept clicking on one when I meant
the other one or something like that.
So yeah, so then we can go into foobar and
it's like okay,
foobar I'm interested in stepping in cuz
if I skip over foobar, it's done, right,
there's no more code to execute.
So I'll step into foobar and boom,
get a breakpoint here at line 13,
the beginning of foobar.
So there's nothing to step into here,
it's just an object creation.
But you can start to
really get a feel for,
especially with JavaScript's rules
around things like hoisting.
It can be confusing to understand
how your program is executing and
step through debugging, even if you don't
have a bug can be really useful for
just understanding what lines get
executed when, what stuff's being set.
So for example, if we step
back and back one more.
And then, can I step into foo now?
See, all right, even I screwed it up.
So, if you step over, then stepping
out is not gonna get you back.
If you step over and
you need to go back to something,
you gotta restart the application process,
basically.
So, I'm just gonna go
ahead an restart it here.
So if I wanted to check on,
I'm watching this variable one, and
one is undefined here, right?
Cuz it hasn't executed this line yet.
But if I step to the next function call
which is this bar here on line 8, you'll
notice that the one that we're watching
over here is set to this variable.
So that's really cool.
The other thing that I wanted to
mention that's really useful is as
state is preserved,
you can also use the console as though
the application were frozen in time.
So if I go to console and I just type one,
it actually knows my variable frozen
in state, as set to this string of one.
So you can kind of take things into
the console and click through them or
play with them, stuff like that.